Design to support ByRefLike types in Generics (#67129)
dotnet/runtime: docs/design/features/byreflike-generics.md

# Generics parameters of ByRefLike types

Using ByRefLike types in Generic parameters is possible by building upon support added for `ref` fields. Scenarios that would benefit most from this are those involving `Span<T>`. For example, consider the following examples:

- `Span<TypedReference>` &ndash; Represents the general case where a ByRefLike type is used as a Generic parameter. This specific case would be desirable for a more efficient Reflection API.
- `Span<Span<char>>` &ndash; Nested `Span<T>` types would be of benefit in the parsing result of strings.

> ## Runtime impact

Author: That will be enforced by the TypeLoader with the `ref` field work already. I will call it out here though.

## API Proposal

Support for the following will be indicated by a new property. For .NET 7, the feature will be marked with `RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute` to indicate it is in [preview](https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/main/accepted/2021/preview-features/preview-features.md).

```diff
namespace System.Runtime.CompilerServices
{
    public static partial class RuntimeFeature
    {
+        /// <summary>
+        /// Represents a runtime feature where byref-like types can be used in Generic parameters.
+        /// </summary>
+        public const string GenericsAcceptByRefLike = nameof(GenericsAcceptByRefLike);
    }
}
```

The compiler will need an indication for existing troublesome APIs where ByRefLike types will be permissable, but where the failure will be handled at runtime. An attribute will be created and added to these APIs.

```csharp
namespace System.Runtime.CompilerServices
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Indicates to the compiler that constrain checks should be suppressed
    /// and will instead be enforced at run-time.
    /// </summary>
    public sealed class SuppressConstraintChecksAttribute : Attribute
    { }
}
```

> Troublesome APIs:

Reviewer: I expect that there will be a lot more APIs like this that are troublesome. For example, `ArraySegment<T>` will need to allow T to be byref type (`static implicit operator ReadOnlySpan<T>(ArraySegment<T> segment)` would not compile otherwise) and APIs on `ArraySegment` that create arrays internally will be troublesome.

Author: > would not compile otherwise) and APIs on ArraySegment that create arrays internally will be troublesome.

I don't see why this is the case. The proposed `SuppressConstraintChecksAttribute` attribute would let the compiler know validation should be suppressed for this and handled at run-time. What am I missing with how this attribute will work?

Author: @jaredpar That is also how I understand this type too.  However, @jkotas mentioned the need for `ArraySegment<T>` to support ByRefLike types, which is the part I am not understanding. The `SuppressConstraintChecksAttribute` would make types that won't work in the context a run-time failure as opposed to the compiler handling the case. Or am I missing the distinction between `unsafe` and the flow of generic parameter constraints resolution?

Reviewer: I assumed that the compiler will always enforce the constraints, and `SuppressConstraintChecksAttribute` will be only used to mark methods that may fail runtime.

If `SuppressConstraintChecksAttribute` were to suppress constraint enforcement, it opens a whole new set of failure modes. For example, inspecting a method signature using reflection may throw new kinds of exceptions since the signature may contain malformed types due to suppressed constraints.

Reviewer: Specific example:
```
foreach (var m in typeof(Span<Span<int>>).GetMethods())
    foreach (var t in m.GetParameters())
        Console.WriteLine(t);
```
Does this throw an exception when it hits the operator that takes `ArraySegment`?

Author: I would not expect that to fail since it is being used for Reflection purposes. This is similar to what I was assuming was your perspective regarding `MakeGenericType` / `MakeGenericMethod` above.

Reviewer: > I would not expect that to fail 

Reflection would need to return Type for `ArraySegment<Span<int>>` to make this succeed. Reflection only ever returns types with valid constraints. It means that `ArraySegment<T>` would need to allow T to be byref type.

Author: Good point. Another option would be to skip over the types that aren't valid. This approach would be less than ideal but given the scope of this API it might not be too bad. The tradeoff here is between special casing the Reflection API or adding the ByRefLike support to types that can never be instantiated. In our offline conversation, you mentioned `abstract` types fall into this as well so I think the latter approach makes the most sense right now.

- [`Span<T>`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.span-1)

>     - `public Span(T[]? array);`

Reviewer: The type loader rejects arrays of byref like types very early today (look for `IDS_CLASSLOAD_BYREFLIKEARRAY`). It is not possible to create a type for e.g. `Span<int>[]`. 

This restriction would prevent troublesome methods from being inspected using reflection when the type is instantiated over byref type. Attempt to get the method argument types would throw.

I think we will need to allow creating these types (e.g. allow `typeof(Span<int>[])`) and delay the failure till attempt to allocate the array allocation to make the reflection behavior reasonable.

Author: I think we are going with the idea that using Reflection on the `Span<T>`/`ReadOnlySpan<T>` types may cause a `TypeLoadException` if `T` is ByRefLike.

    - `public Span(T[]? array, int start, int length);`
    - `public T[] ToArray();`
    - `public static implicit operator Span<T>(ArraySegment<T> segment);`
    - `public static implicit operator Span<T>(T[]? array);`
- [`ReadOnlySpan<T>`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.readonlyspan-1)
    - `public ReadOnlySpan(T[]? array);`
    - `public ReadOnlySpan(T[]? array, int start, int length);`
    - `public T[] ToArray();`
    - `public static implicit operator ReadOnlySpan<T>(ArraySegment<T> segment);`
    - `public static implicit operator ReadOnlySpan<T>(T[]? array);`

A new `GenericParameterAttributes` value will be defined which also represents metadata defined in the `CorGenericParamAttr` enumeration. Space is provided between the existing constraints group to permit constraint growth while keeping the bit-mask contiguous.

```diff
namespace System.Reflection
{
    [Flags]
    public enum GenericParameterAttributes
    {
+        AcceptByRefLike = 0x0100
    }
}
```

```diff
typedef enum CorGenericParamAttr
{
+   gpAcceptByRefLike = 0x0100 // type argument can be ByRefLike
} CorGenericParamAttr;
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Consider an API currently defined as 

```c#
public void M<T>() { }
```

Given this design consider if it is changed to the following:

```c#
public void M<T>() allow T : ref struct { }
```

Does that represent a binary breaking change or not (assuming C# compiler emits the metadata as specified here)? Think it's overall desirable that this not be a binary breaking change as it allows existing APIs, that could be `ref struct` compatible, to be evolved to be such.

Author: I was intending this to follow the same rules as if someone was relaxing an existing constraint. For example, if one converts

```csharp
public void M<T>() where T : unmanaged { }
```
to
```csharp
public void M<T>() { }
```

In my mind this is the same as being more permissible with now allowing `ref struct`. I'd argue the relaxing of constraints and expansion of permissible types should follow the same rules.

I've not checked if the current constraint behavior is a breaking change so perhaps someone can education me here, but that is what I would expect.

The expansion of metadata will impact at least the following:

> - ILDasm/ILAsm &ndash; https://github.com/dotnet/runtime

Author: Agree. Will mention SRM and SRE here.

- Cecil &ndash; https://github.com/jbevain/cecil
- IL Trimmer &ndash; https://github.com/dotnet/linker
- F# &ndash; https://github.com/fsharp/fsharp
- C++/CLI &ndash; The MSVC team

## Semantic Proposal

An API that is a JIT-time intrinsic will be needed to determine if a parameter is ByRefLike. This API would represent a check to occur at JIT time to avoid taking paths that would be invalid for some values of `T`. The existing `Type.IsByRefLike` property will be made an intrinsic (e.g., `typeof(T).IsByRefLike`).

For dispatch to object implemented methods and to default interface methods, the behavior shall be that an `InvalidProgramException` should be thrown. The JIT will insert the following IL at code-gen time.

```
newobj instance void System.InvalidProgramException::.ctor()
throw
```

> The `Reflection.Emit` API will be updated to respect ByRefLike support in Generics. The current Reflection API requires boxing of all types which makes usage of ByRefLike types impossible. Until the Reflection API can fully support ByRefLike types, this feature must be blocked when using Reflection. For example, API calls such as `MakeGenericType` / `MakeGenericMethod` will be invalid when `T` is ByRefLike.

Reviewer: > The `Reflection.Emit` API will be updated to respect ByRefLike support in Generics.

What does it mean specifically? Does it require any new API or just fixing up some internal implementation details?

> The `Reflection.Emit` API will be updated to respect ByRefLike support in Generics. The current Reflection API requires boxing of all types which makes usage of ByRefLike types impossible. Until the Reflection API can fully support ByRefLike types, this feature must be blocked when using Reflection. For example, API calls such as `MakeGenericType` / `MakeGenericMethod` will be invalid when `T` is ByRefLike.

Reviewer: > For example, API calls such as `MakeGenericType` / `MakeGenericMethod` will be invalid when `T` is ByRefLike.

Why is that? I do not see anything fundamental that should prevent this. These APIs basically just call the type loader. If the type loader can create the type e.g. for the JIT, these APIs should be able to create the type as well.

## Special IL Sequences

> The following are IL sequences involving the `box` instruction. They are used in scenario optimizations and shall continue to be valid, even with ByRefLike types, in cases where the result can be computed at JIT time and elided safely. They will be added to the ECMA-335 addendum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are IL sequences involving the `box` instruction. They are used for common C# language constructs and shall continue to be valid, even with ByRefLike types, in cases where the result can be computed at JIT time and elided safely. They will be added to the ECMA-335 addendum.
```

Reviewer: > in cases where the result can be computed at JIT time

What are those cases exactly? There are varying levels of optimizations and assumptions that the JIT can apply to these. The exact cases that are required to be have recognized by the JIT have to be enumerated as part of the spec. These cases will be required for functional correctness, they won't be an optional optimization anymore.

Reviewer: I think you probably want to say that the JIT is always required to recognize these sequences and never perform the box operation for them. 

Whether the JIT can compute the result as a constant or whether it calls a helper function to compute the result is JIT implementation detail.

# Generics parameters of ByRefLike types

Using ByRefLike types in Generic parameters is possible by building upon support added for `ref` fields. Scenarios that would benefit most from this are those involving `Span<T>`. For example, consider the following examples:

- `Span<TypedReference>` &ndash; Represents the general case where a ByRefLike type is used as a Generic parameter. This specific case would be desirable for a more efficient Reflection API.
- `Span<Span<char>>` &ndash; Nested `Span<T>` types would be of benefit in the parsing result of strings.

## Runtime impact

> Supporting ByRefLike type as Generic parameters will impact the following IL instructions:

Reviewer 3: Will this have a type loader impact too or it's more about just relaxing validation in the type loader and defining behaviors of instructions when T is a byref-like type?

It kind of feels like we could also handle this in the runtime the same way we handle the existing constraints (`struct`, `new()`, etc.). But maybe validating this can be purely a tooling concern, not runtime concern, since we will have semantics for when IL operations don't make sense for a specific T.

```csharp
class Foo<AnyT> where AnyT : any
{
    // Do we get a TypeLoadException for List<AnyT> when JIT compiling this method
    // or do we get an InvalidProgramException when the List<T> constructor is trying
    // to get an empty array of T for the backing store?
    static object Get() => new List<AnyT>();
}
```

Author: > Will this have a type loader impact too or it's more about just relaxing validation in the type loader and defining behaviors of instructions when T is a byref-like type?

The latter. My thought here was to push failure to JIT time. In the scenario above, if `Get()` was never called then it should be okay. Implementers could use the `IsByRefLike<T>()` to tailor the failure case if desired though.

Reviewer: ```
class Foo<AnyT> where AnyT : any
{
    // Do we get a TypeLoadException for List<AnyT> when JIT compiling this method
    // or do we get an InvalidProgramException when the List<T> constructor is trying
    // to get an empty array of T for the backing store?
    static object Get() => new List<AnyT>();
}
```
I expect that this will be C# compile error. (I do not expect we will add `any` relaxation for `List<T>`.)

If you agree, the exact runtime behavior is not really interesting here. I can also just crash somewhere in the runtime like it is the case for invalid IL in general.

Reviewer 3: > I expect that this will be C# compile error

I expect that too - this was pseudo-C# just to convey what I mean :).

> If you agree, the exact runtime behavior is not really interesting here.

The runtime behavior might be observable through `MakeGenericType`/`MakeGenericMethod` - if we allow `MakeGeneric` with byref-like types and someone uses it with a type where the `T` is not `any` and we don't block it, they'll get an oddly damaged type. If we do block it, the question is where to block it. The place where we validate constraints seems like a natural fit. But it will affect the above mentioned code paths too.

> - `box` &ndash; Types with ByRefLike parameters used in fields cannot be boxed.

Reviewer 4: For these scenarios, please describe the new behavior of the IL opcode. Should it throw? etc.

- `throw` &ndash; Requires an object reference on the stack so not directly impacted since boxing is not permitted.

> - `stsfld` / `ldsfld` &ndash; Type fields of a ByRefLike parameter cannot be marked `static`.

Reviewer: Does this mean that the generic type can have static field like that, but all attempts to access it via IL instructions or via reflection are going to fail?

Reviewer: Does it mean that this is going to be C# compile error?
```
class G<AnyT> where AnyT : any
{
    static AnyT s;
}
```

Author: > Does it mean that this is going to be C# compile error?

I don't believe so. This would only occur if `AnyT` was a ByRefLike type _and_ was accessed at run-time. Is the point here that `static` fields are automatically initialized during type load?

Reviewer 5: It seems like it would be best to make it an error in C#.

Author: @RikkiGibson That is fine. My point was that the runtime will handle this during type instantiation. As far as what C# does that is up to the language, the runtime will handle the case either way.

- `newarr` / `stelem` / `ldelem` / `ldelema` &ndash; Arrays are not able to contain ByRefLike types.
    - `newobj` &ndash; For multi-dimensional array construction.
- `constrained.callvirt` &ndash; This IL sequence must resolve to a method implemented on `object`, or a default interface method.

> - Use of any Generic which doesn’t expect a ByRefLike parameter as a Generic parameter.

Reviewer 6: Should `isinst` and `unbox.any` be included?

Author: I don't think we can get to the `unbox.any` instruction since we can't box. Not saying I shouldn't call out behavior, but do want to make sure I'm understanding the why it should be included.

For `isinst`, that is a good point. I _think_ you're right. Let me page back in how this instruction works so I can define the "why".

Reviewer 6: For `unbox.any`, is the following possible?
```
.method static !!T F<T>(object obj)
{
    ldarg.0
    unbox.any !!T
    ret
}
```

Author: I think this will simply always fail because `obj` will never be able to be a `T` that is ByRefLike.

## Proposal

> A new Attribute API will be defined to indicate which Generic parameters are permissible to be of any type&mdash;including ByRefLike types. The Attribute could be used by the compiler to implement a generic non-constraint.

Reviewer: We have `GenericParameterAttributes` flags in metadata. Would it make more sense to use a bit in these flags for this?

Author: Yes. I agree this is probably the better place for this support.

```csharp
namespace System.Runtime.CompilerServices
{

>     [AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.Class | AttributeTargets.Method, AllowMultiple = true)]

Reviewer 6: `| AttributeTargets.Struct | AttributeTargets.Delegate | AttributeTargets.Interface`

Reviewer 7: According to the proposal in dotnet/csharplang#5817 generic delegates would automatically support byref-like types. Why would applying the attribute on delegates still be needed?

Author: > generic delegates would automatically support byref-like types

I don't see that in the proposal nor would that be possible at present. There is no way to support ByRefLike types in Generics in any form at present. Perhaps I am misunderstanding your point though.

Reviewer 7: Oops, I misclicked. The proposal is dotnet/csharplang#5689 and the relevant point is https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/pull/5689/files#diff-67b62b3a3e0ed8896aa17e6a455ddc5ca90586364864c7bfd280223999a98b3fR191.

Author: > The proposal is https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/pull/5689

Thanks.

> Why would applying the attribute on delegates still be needed?

Because the compiler still needs a way to convey that message and encode it. At present there is no way to encode that case and this attribute is an option. However, others exist - see various statements in this design doc by @jkotas and @MichalStrehovsky.

Author: Moving indication to metadata flags.

>     [AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.Class | AttributeTargets.Method, AllowMultiple = true)]

Reviewer 3: Why not `[AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.GenericParameter)]` and then we don't need to deal with the index separately?

(But if we expect runtime to be reading this, Jan's suggestion to use the from GenericParamAttributes is even better - though it's a file format change. If the runtime won't be reading this, I would be more inclined towards an attribute.)

Author: I agree. I am incline to use `GenericParamAttributes`. I'll be updating this part.

>     public class GenericParameterSupportsAnyTypeAttribute : Attribute

Reviewer 6: `sealed`?

>     public class GenericParameterSupportsAnyTypeAttribute : Attribute

Reviewer 5: I'm nervous about using the term "any type". For example, I'm not sure whether pointers would be permitted as type arguments as part of this design.

Author: That is a good point. It also would seem to align with using the existing attribute flags mentioned above. I will reconsider this.

> Support for the following would be indicated by the existing `RuntimeFeature.ByRefFields` mechanism.

Reviewer: I believe that we are going to finish `ByRefFields` in .NET 7. This is going to be preview feature at best in .NET 7. I think this feature needs to get a new flag under `RuntimeFeature`.

Author: Are we certain the runtime side of this can't be finished in .NET 7? At present there do seem to be a fair number of changes, but I'm not seeing a specific red-flag that indicates this can't be completed. I agree that if something isn't in prior to the last preview before our first RC we aren't going to make.

Reviewer: We can declare this finished only after both runtime and Roslyn sides are done, the end-to-end have seen some use and the feedback has been incorporated. If we want to ship it before that, it should be marked as preview. We even have annotations to mark it as such now.

Author: > We can declare this finished only after both runtime and Roslyn sides are done

That wasn't how I was defining this, but that does make it clear this won't be complete in .NET 7. What is the process for marking this in preview?

Reviewer: Design doc: https://github.com/dotnet/designs/blob/main/accepted/2021/preview-features/preview-features.md

This is what similar situation looked like in .NET 6 (snippet https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/release/6.0/src/libraries/System.Runtime/ref/System.Runtime.cs):
```
    public static partial class RuntimeFeature
    {
        [System.Runtime.Versioning.RequiresPreviewFeaturesAttribute("Generic Math is in preview.", Url = "https://aka.ms/dotnet-warnings/generic-math-preview")]
        public const string VirtualStaticsInInterfaces = "VirtualStaticsInInterfaces";
    }
```

        /// </summary>
        /// Constructs an instance with a Generic parameter index of 0.
        /// </summary>
        public GenericParameterSupportsAnyTypeAttribute()
            => ParameterIndex = 0;

        /// </summary>
        /// Constructs an instance with a Generic parameter index.
        /// </summary>
        /// <param name="parameterIndex">Non-negative index of Generic parameter to apply to.</param>
        public GenericParameterSupportsAnyTypeAttribute(int parameterIndex)
            => ParameterIndex = parameterIndex;

        /// <summary>
        /// Generic Parameter Index.
        /// </summary>

>         public int ParameterIndex { get; set; }

Reviewer 6: Should `ParameterIndex` be readonly?

    }
}
```

> A new API will be implemented as a JIT intrinsic for determining if a parameter is ByRefLike. This API would represent a check to occur at JIT time code-gen to avoid taking paths that would be invalid for some values of `T`.

Reviewer: What happens if the path that is invalid for some some values of `T` is not gated by this API?

Author: If one of the invalid instructions is used, an `InvalidProgramException` would be thrown. That is at least my current thinking. I need to go through the instructions again and ensure there aren't cases where we would instead need a "fail fast".

> 

Reviewer: Is the C# compiler going to generate calls to this API in some cases, or is this API meant just for the user code to use?

Author: The example case here is `ToArray()` on `Span<T>`. The implementation would do the check and during JIT time the branch would be all that was present in the code - so user code. I could also see the compiler using this for scenarios too. If that were the case though I assume you would prefer to see this under `System.Runtime.CompilerServices`?

```diff
namespace System
{
    public abstract partial class Type
    {
+        [Intrinsic]

> +        public static bool IsByRefLike<T>();

Author: That is true and something I did consider. The reason I didn't go down that path is because it is much harder to author a JIT intrinsic with that sort of statement, at least with my current knowledge of the JIT. I'll add the option though. I agree that if the general form of `typeof(T).<PROP>` were enabled we could improve several scenarios.

> +        public static bool IsByRefLike<T>();

Reviewer: > it is much harder to author a JIT intrinsic with that sort of statement

It is not that much harder. (Search for `NI_System_Type_get_IsValueType` to see what it takes to have `typeof(T).IsValueType` treated as intrinsic.)

> +        public static bool IsByRefLike<T>();

Author: > It is not that much harder. (Search for NI_System_Type_get_IsValueType to see what it takes to have typeof(T).IsValueType treated as intrinsic.)

I misread @MichalStrehovsky's statement, he was making the same point. The fact that this path is already present makes me think it should be preferred. I'll remove the new API and go with making `typeof(T).IsByRefLike` an instrinsic.

    }
}
```

For dispatch to object implemented methods and to default interface methods, the behavior shall be that an `InvalidProgramException` should be thrown. The JIT would insert the following IL at code-gen time.

```
newobj instance void System.InvalidProgramException::.ctor()
throw
```

> When boxing due to a constrained call that cannot be made, instead of allocating a normal boxed object, an object of `InvalidBoxedObject` type will be created. It will have implementations of the various overridable object methods which throw `InvalidProgramException`, and interface dispatch shall have a special case for attempting to invoke an interface method on such an object, that will also throw an `InvalidProgramException`.

Reviewer 4: What about the behavior of default interface methods.

Reviewer 4: Oh I see. I shouldn't read documents, bottom up.

> When boxing due to a constrained call that cannot be made, instead of allocating a normal boxed object, an object of `InvalidBoxedObject` type will be created. It will have implementations of the various overridable object methods which throw `InvalidProgramException`, and interface dispatch shall have a special case for attempting to invoke an interface method on such an object, that will also throw an `InvalidProgramException`.

Reviewer 3: Why do we need the `InvalidBoxedObject`? Can't we just throw `InvalidProgram` during the boxing attempt?

Reviewer 3: I think I see:

1. If we throw during boxing, we would throw "Type 'SomeRefLikeType' needs to be boxed to perform this call, but the type is byref-like." (not giving context on the fact what interface/base virtual call we try to make).
2. If we make an InvalidBoxedObject, we would throw "Cannot call method IFoo.SomeMethod on this type because it's byref-like" (not giving context on the type of `this` instead).

1 has less implementation complexity (it may actually already work, modulo the more specific message). 2 gives more detail in a way but also less detail in another way.

Author: I was given some additional feedback on this approach. I'm going to simply apply (1) unless we determine something like (2) is needed.

> # Generics parameters of ByRefLike types

Reviewer 8: Just to clarify: this is specifically about `Span<Span<byte>>` not `Span<ref byte>`?

Author: Correct. I believe that `Span<ref T>` would be slightly more complicated for all parties. This work is specifically about permitting `ref struct` types (ByRefLike) to be used as Generic parameters. Further details from the language side can be found at https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/pull/5689.

Using ByRefLike types in Generic parameters is possible by building upon support added for `ref` fields. Scenarios that would benefit most from this are those involving `Span<T>`. For example, consider the following examples:

- `Span<TypedReference>` &ndash; Represents the general case where a ByRefLike type is used as a Generic parameter. This specific case would be desirable for a more efficient Reflection API.
- `Span<Span<char>>` &ndash; Nested `Span<T>` types would be of benefit in the parsing result of strings.

## Runtime impact

Supporting ByRefLike type as Generic parameters will impact the following IL instructions:

- `box` &ndash; Types with ByRefLike parameters used in fields cannot be boxed.
- `stsfld` / `ldsfld` &ndash; Type fields of a ByRefLike parameter cannot be marked `static`.
- `newarr` / `stelem` / `ldelem` / `ldelema` &ndash; Arrays are not able to contain ByRefLike types.
    - `newobj` &ndash; For multi-dimensional array construction.

> - `constrained.callvirt` &ndash; This IL sequence must resolve to a method implemented on `object`, or a default interface method.

Reviewer 2: The "must" here is throwing me off. My intuition is that `constrained.callvirt` would be an error when it resolved to `object` or a default interface method. Otherwise though it should be allowed.

Author: That is a cumbersome description. Let me try again.

Author: @jaredpar Let me know if this is clearer.

> If any of the above instructions are attempted to be used with a ByRefLike type, the runtime will throw an `InvalidProgramException`.

Reviewer 2: Types like `Span<T>` have several APIs that conflict with the rules above. Most notable:

```c#
public Span(T[]? array);
public static implicit operator Span<T>(T[]? array);
```

How are we going to rationalize these APIs when we add `allow T: ref struct` to `Span<T>`?

Reviewer 5: Jared and I have discussed this separately before. There are probably multiple viable ways to go but I think that exposing a compiler-known way to suppress constraint checks on specific APIs would do it. Then, I'm hoping that conversion errors at the use site will prevent the APIs from being used when the type arguments don't permit it.

```cs
using System;

namespace System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis
{
    public sealed class SuppressConstraintChecksAttribute : Attribute { }
}

ref struct Span<T> allow T : ref struct
{
    [SuppressConstraintChecks]
    public Span(T[]? array) { ... }

    [SuppressConstraintChecks]
    public static implicit operator Span<T>(T[]? array) { ... }
}

class Program
{
    static void M(Span<Span<int>> span)
    {
        var span1 = new Span<Span<int>>(null); // error: can't convert 'null' to type 'Span<int>[]'
        var span2 = (Span<Span<int>>)null; // error: can't convert 'null' to type 'Span<int>[]'
    }
}
```

This might leave a hole where the attribute could be used on methods which only violate type parameter constraints within the implementation, not in the signature. The user wouldn't be stopped from doing it at compile time but could get a runtime error. That might just be a case of "play stupid games, win stupid prizes".

Tagging @davidwrighton who had interest in a 'SuppressConstraintChecksAttribute' for a scenario with static interface members, IIRC.

Author: > That might just be a case of "play stupid games, win stupid prizes".

That is how I am thinking of this feature. There are cases where the compiler can definitely determine if the user is doing something wrong, but also where it _might_ be doing something wrong. The [`Span<T>.ToArray()`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.span-1.toarray) is another example. If a user calls `ToArray()` and `T` is known to be ByRefLike, the compiler could issue a failure. However, if `T` isn't know at compile time then it would be up to the implementer to have handled this appropriately using something like the proposed intrinsi-fication of `typeof(T.).IsByRefLike` in this document. The updated `Span<T>.ToArray()` would look as follows and handle the case at runtime. The other APIs in question would have similar checks.

```diff
[MethodImpl(MethodImplOptions.AggressiveInlining)]
public T[] ToArray()
{
+    if (typeof(T).IsByRefLike)
+        throw new InvalidProgramException();

    if (_length == 0)
        return Array.Empty<T>();

    var destination = new T[_length];
    Buffer.Memmove(ref MemoryMarshal.GetArrayDataReference(destination), ref _pointer.Value, (uint)_length);
    return destination;
}
```

Author: It will be enforced but can all be detected at JIT time, which can then error once `T` is defined. The fact that `typeof(T).IsByRefLike` is a JIT intrinsic will permit it to detect that branch is always taken and the remaining instructions can be removed. In the event the user didn't put in that call the invalid instructions would then be processed but during the inspection of `T` it would be determined something is invalid and `InvalidProgramException` throw.

I suppose the example is bad since it is also throwing. Let me update it to reflect a more reasonable return.

Author: Actually `ToArray` is a hard example to make something more reasonable. Imagine the return could be something that is used by the caller in a reasonable way. Unsure what that would be in this case though.

Author: Thanks @RikkiGibson and @jaredpar. I'd not fully appreciated the compiler issues here.

```diff
namespace System.Reflection
{
    [Flags]
    public enum GenericParameterAttributes
    {
+        AcceptByRefLike = 0x0100
    }
}
```

```diff
typedef enum CorGenericParamAttr
{
+   gpAcceptByRefLike = 0x0100 // type argument can be ByRefLike
} CorGenericParamAttr;
```

The expansion of metadata will impact at least the following:

- ILDasm/ILAsm &ndash; https://github.com/dotnet/runtime
- Cecil &ndash; https://github.com/jbevain/cecil
- IL Trimmer &ndash; https://github.com/dotnet/linker
- F# &ndash; https://github.com/fsharp/fsharp
- C++/CLI &ndash; The MSVC team

An API that is a JIT-time intrinsic will be needed to determine if a parameter is ByRefLike. This API would represent a check to occur at JIT time code-gen to avoid taking paths that would be invalid for some values of `T`. The existing `Type.IsByRefLike` property will be made an intrinsic (e.g., `typeof(T).IsByRefLike`).

For dispatch to object implemented methods and to default interface methods, the behavior shall be that an `InvalidProgramException` should be thrown. The JIT would insert the following IL at code-gen time.

```
newobj instance void System.InvalidProgramException::.ctor()
throw
```

> When boxing due to a constrained call that cannot be made, instead of allocating a normal boxed object, an object of `InvalidBoxedObject` type will be created. It will have implementations of the various overridable object methods which throw `InvalidProgramException`, and interface dispatch shall have a special case for attempting to invoke an interface method on such an object, that will also throw an `InvalidProgramException`.

Author: @lambdageek This has changed to simply be a failure during the boxing attempt. I assume there is an easy spot to handle that boxing and fail.

The `Reflection.Emit` API will need to be updated to respect the behavior of this flag. How it will handle support is an open question.

> ## Open questions

Reviewer 2: There are other proposals out there to expand the set of allowed generic arguments. Most notably to include pointers. Do you anticipate this design will cause future compat issues with those proposals?

Author: I can't see that causing an issue. We have a fair number of bits (10) remaining on `GenericParameterAttributes` after this one so we are still good to support both. I suppose we could look at devising a more extensive mechanism if there are future concerns.

- `Span<Span<char>>` &ndash; Nested `Span<T>` types would be of benefit in the parsing result of strings.

## Runtime impact

Supporting ByRefLike type as Generic parameters will impact the following IL instructions:

- `box` &ndash; Types with ByRefLike parameters used in fields cannot be boxed.
- `stsfld` / `ldsfld` &ndash; Type fields of a ByRefLike parameter cannot be marked `static`.
- `newarr` / `stelem` / `ldelem` / `ldelema` &ndash; Arrays are not able to contain ByRefLike types.
    - `newobj` &ndash; For multi-dimensional array construction.
- `constrained.callvirt` &ndash; If this IL sequence resolves to a method implemented on `object` or default interface method, an error will occur during the attempt to box the instance.

If any of the above instructions are attempted to be used with a ByRefLike type, the runtime will throw an `InvalidProgramException`.

The following instructions are already set up to support this feature since their behavior will fail as currently defined due to the inability to box a ByRefLike type.

- `throw` &ndash; Requires an object reference to be on stack, which can never be a ByRefLike type.

> - `unbox` / `unbox.any` &ndash; Requires an object reference to be on stack, which can never be a ByRefLike type.

Reviewer 2: True they require an object reference but the following sequence is effectively how non-boxing casts work in IL: 

```il
        IL_000d: ldarg.0
        IL_000e: box !!T
        IL_0013: isinst [System.Private.CoreLib]System.Int32
        IL_0018: unbox.any [System.Private.CoreLib]System.Int32
        IL_001d: stloc.0
```

This doesn't actually put the `struct` on the heap hence my instinct is it would be valid for `ref struct`. If it's not valid then we effectively lose the ability to do pattern matching and type checks on `ref struct`.

Author: The `box` instruction above doesn't actually box the argument?

Author: See https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/67129#discussion_r837976315

> - `isinst` &ndash; Will always place `null` on stack.

Reviewer 2: Why would `isinst` always produce `null`? It would seem to be a completely valid pattern to do the following

```c#
void M<T>(T value) {
  if (value is Span<byte> span) {
  }
}
```

This pattern works for value types today.

Author: I'm not sure how to make this work to be honest. I see the generated code is basically what you have below. However, a `box` instruction has language that indicates it will be boxed and that can't happen for ByRefLike types. I'd say this is invalid IL if `T` is ByRefLike and will fail during JIT.

I am interpreting this case from ECMA-335:

> If typeTok is a value type, the box instruction converts val to its boxed form. When typeTok is a 
non-nullable type (§I.8.2.4), this is done by creating a new object and copying the data from val 
into the newly allocated object. If it is a nullable type, this is done by inspecting val’s HasValue 
property; if it is false, a null reference is pushed onto the stack; otherwise, the result of boxing 
val’s Value property is pushed onto the stack. 

> If typeTok is a reference type, the box instruction does returns val unchanged as obj. 

> If typeTok is a generic parameter, the behavior of box instruction depends on the actual type at 
runtime. If this type is a value type it is boxed as above, if it is a reference type then val is not 
changed. However the type tracked by verification is always “boxed” typeTok for generic parameters, regardless of whether the actual type at runtime is a value or reference type. 

The statement "If this type is a value type it is boxed as above" is what I am focusing on.

Author: I see. There is huge special case in the JIT that handles this case. It is commented as "match and import common box idioms". My description is valid and follows ECMA, but the JIT special cases this sequence and effectively elides the `box` instruction.

Author: Basically, your concern is noted and that sequence should continue to work.

Author: Recorded sequences and defined plan.
